Add Security FAQ (#21)
apache/logging-site: src/site/antora/modules/ROOT/pages/security/faq.adoc

//  distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
//  WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
//  See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
//  limitations under the License.
////

= Frequently Reported Vulnerabilities

This page documents issues that are **frequently reported** in Logging Services software but are **not considered vulnerabilities** according to our xref:security.adoc#threat-model[threat model].

These reports often stem from valid concerns in specific contexts, but reflect common misunderstandings about how logging systems are designed to operate and what security guarantees they provide.

The goal of this FAQ is to:

* Clarify common misconceptions
* Explain why these reports fall outside our threat model
* Help you make informed decisions when configuring logging

[NOTE]
====
This document is not intended to dismiss security concerns, but to provide context and guidance.
Depending on your environment, some of these topics may still warrant **defensive configuration**.
====

[#crlf-injection]
== https://cwe.mitre.org/data/definitions/93.html[CWE-93: CRLF Injection]

> A frequently reported issue is the presence of CR (`\r`) and LF (`\n`) characters in layout output.

Reviewer: I would clarify "layout output" by listing the ones we provide.

Author: This is a generic context (for Log4cxx, Log4j and Log4net). I don't know if we should provide a list of layouts.

I tried to expand the introduction in https://github.com/apache/logging-site/pull/21/commits/e5e12d8ef06c54415bbdec5df4a429baff6b5763

What do you think?

> In most logging contexts this behavior is **intentional** and **not considered a vulnerability**.

Reviewer: I don't think bold is needed or whatever `**` means here if it's different from Markdown.

Author: Removed bold in https://github.com/apache/logging-site/pull/21/commits/15a2c2618bac8fd0a5f2c2032e9dc373dd6a0db8

=== Pattern layout

**Claim**: Pattern layout is vulnerable to CRLF injection because it does not escape CRLF characters.

> Pattern layout is an **unstructured text format**.

Reviewer: Broken styling?
`**unstructured` -> `unstructured`

Author: I limited bold to `unstructured` instead of `unstructured text format`: https://github.com/apache/logging-site/pull/21/commits/15a2c2618bac8fd0a5f2c2032e9dc373dd6a0db8

These reports often stem from valid concerns in specific contexts, but reflect common misunderstandings about how logging systems are designed to operate and what security guarantees they provide.

The goal of this FAQ is to:

* Clarify common misconceptions
* Explain why these reports fall outside our threat model
* Help you make informed decisions when configuring logging

[NOTE]
====
This document is not intended to dismiss security concerns, but to provide context and guidance.
Depending on your environment, some of these topics may still warrant **defensive configuration**.
====

[#crlf-injection]
== https://cwe.mitre.org/data/definitions/93.html[CWE-93: CRLF Injection]

Apache Logging Services libraries (Log4cxx, Log4j, and Log4net) allow users to customize log output through a variety of layouts.
A frequently reported issue is that CR (`\r`) and LF (`\n`) characters present in a log event can appear in the output,
making it difficult to reliably delimit individual events when parsing.

> In most cases this behavior is intentional and not considered a vulnerability.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In most configurations, this behavior is intentional and not considered a vulnerability within the defined threat model.
```

The sections below cover the layouts for which this has most commonly been reported.

[#crlf-injection-pattern-layout]
=== Pattern layout

**Claim**: Pattern layout is vulnerable to CRLF injection because it does not escape CRLF characters.

Pattern layout is an **unstructured** text format.
It defines no fields, no delimiters, and no escaping rules, so it makes no attempt to neutralize control characters, including CRLF sequences.
This means:

* Log output will contain CRLF characters if they are present in the input.
* The layout itself provides **no output sanitization** guarantees.

This behavior is by design and consistent with the layout's purpose.

[#crlf-injection-pattern-layout-why-not]
==== Why this is not a vulnerability

CRLF injection is a concern only when both of the following conditions apply:

* Log output is consumed as **structured data** (for example, by an ingestion pipeline), _and_
* Downstream consumers assume that the output has been sanitized.

> Pattern layout makes neither of those guarantees: that responsibility falls to the user.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Pattern layout guarantees only formatting, not safety or parseability.
```

Tools such as https://www.elastic.co/docs/reference/enrich-processor/grok-processor[Grok] can parse Pattern layout output automatically, but only when the output consistently matches the expected pattern.
Unescaped CRLF sequences can break that assumption.

[IMPORTANT]
====
If your logs are consumed in any of these ways:

* Parsed automatically by a downstream tool
* Ingested into a structured storage or SIEM system
* Used in security-sensitive workflows

then **avoid Pattern layout** and use a **structured layout** instead, such as JSON or RFC 5424.
====

[TIP]
====
If you must use Pattern layout, **sanitize all inputs explicitly**, not just the log message.
Common oversights include:

* Sanitizing only `%m` (e.g. `%enc{%m}\{CRLF}` in Log4j Core) while leaving other fields unescaped
* The implicit `%ex` pattern specifier (exception stack traces), which are a frequent and overlooked source of CRLF characters

> * Ostensibly "safe" values such as logger names, thread names, and log levels, which may contain unexpected data depending on your application

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Seemingly "safe" values such as logger names, thread names, and log levels, which may contain unexpected data depending on your application
```

Given that trust, constraining the file paths they may contain provides no meaningful security benefit.

Limiting file paths to a specific directory would also introduce a **chicken-and-egg problem**: doing so would require an additional configuration resource to define the allowed directory, which itself would need to be trusted and protected.
We do not establish a hierarchy of trust between configuration resources (environment variables, system properties, configuration files, and so on): they are all considered equally trusted.

[#path-traversal-problematic-contexts]
=== Problematic contexts

While unvalidated file paths in configuration are not a vulnerability in themselves, they can become one when **interpolation** features (arbiters, lookups, etc.) are used to construct file paths dynamically.

This risk is compounded when interpolation occurs at **runtime** rather than at configuration time: for example, when appenders are created dynamically by Log4j Core's
{site-url}/log4j/2.x/manual/appenders/delegating.html#RoutingAppender[Routing appender].

> In those cases, the interpolated values originate outside the configuration file itself and may not be equally trustworthy.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In those cases, the interpolated values originate outside the configuration file itself and may originate from untrusted or attacker-controlled sources.
```
